---
id: matlab-interface
title: MATLAB
---

## About the MATLAB interface
If you haven't done so already, you first need to [install the MATLAB interface](./installation#matlab-interface).

This inteface allows the designers to prepare their parametric optimizers in MATLAB and then use the code generation tool we provide to build their parametric optimizer in Rust. The generated code can either be used directly in Rust, or, it can be interfaced from **any software**. 

In other words, MATLAB is used to **design** a parametric optimizer, which runs in Rust and can be interfaced from **any** programming language or operating system.

The generated optimzer runs in Rust and exports its functionality using **UDP sockets**.

Let's now walk through the necessary steps to design a parametric optimizer.

## Problem definition

Recall that we need to define a parametric optimization problem of the form

```text
Minimize f(u; p)
subject to: u in U(p)
```

where `u` is the decision variable of the problem and `p` is a parameter.

We, therefore, need to define the cost function and the set of constraints. The gradient of the cost function will be computed automatically (CasADi takes care of that).


### Cost function
Determining the cost function is straightforward. We simply need to create two CasADi symbols, `u` and `p`, for the decision variable and the parameter respectively. These symbols need to have specified dimensions (`nu` and `np` respectively).

```matlab
nu = 6;                        % number of decision variables
np = 2;                        % number of parameters 

u = casadi.SX.sym('u', nu);    % decision variables
p = casadi.SX.sym('p', np);    % parameters

phi = rosenbrock(u, p);        % cost function phi(u; p) 
```

### Constraints

Constraints fall into two sub-categories: non-parametric constraints and parametric ones (which are under development). Non-parametric constraints are specified during design time and cannot be updated in real time. Parametric constraints depend on the parameter `p` and are updated at every invocation of the solver.

Non-parametric constraints are implemented by `@OpEnConstraints`, a MATLAB class which follows the Factory pattern. Constraint objects are created by calling a static function. For example, to create the constraint `|u| <= 1.0`, we construct an instance of `OpEnConstraints` as follows:


```matlab
constraints = OpEnConstraints.make_ball_at_origin(1.0);
```

## Code Generation

### In a nutshell
Code generation is as simple as 

```matlab
build_config = open_build_config();
open_generate_code(build_config, constraints, u, p, phi);
```


### Build configuration
The default build configuration is a structure returned by `build_config = open_build_config();`. This specifies the destination path where the parametric optimizer will be stored, various metadata (authorship, license, etc), solver parameters, and parameters related to the interface. Let us go through these in detail. 

#### Basic configuration
The following properties are metadata:

| Property       | Description                                  |
|----------------|----------------------------------------------|
| `build_name`   | Name of your optimizer (same as folder name) |
| `version`      | Version of your optimizer                    |
| `license`      | String of license                            |
| `authors`      | Cell array with author names                 |


Solver properties:

| Property                | Description                    |
|-------------------------|--------------------------------|
| `solver.lbfgs_mem`      | Length of L-BFGS buffer        |
| `solver.max_iters`      | Maximum number of iterations   |
| `solver.tolerance`      | Tolerance                      |

UDP socket properties:

| Property                       | Description        |
|--------------------------------|--------------------|
| `udp_interface.bind_address`   | Bind address       |
| `udp_interface.port`           | Post (integer)     |



#### Advanced configuration

The following properties are some paths, which you shouldn't need to modify:

| Property                     | Description                                  |
|------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| `optimization_engine_path`   | Path of optimization-engine                  |
| `icasadi_path`               | Path of icasadi (casadi Rust interface)      |
| `build_path`                 | Directory where the optimizer will be stored |
| `build_mode`                 | `debug` or `release`                         |
| `target`                     | target hardware (`rpi` for Raspberry Pi)     |




## Calling the Rust module over UDP sockets

### Starting the module
After you call `open_generate_code`, the auto-generated Rust module can be found in the destination you specified in `build_path` (the default is `build/autogenerated_optimizer/`). 

Enter this directory and run

```bash
cargo run
```

This will start a server that will listen for packets at the speficied bind address (default: `127.0.0.1`) and port (default: `3248`). 



### Consuming the module 

#### Communication Protocol
The client sends to the server a JSON file with the value of parameter `p` in the following format:

```json
{ "parameter" : [1.0, 2.3]}
```

The server solves the optimization problem and returns a JSON file in the following format:

```json
{
	"p" : [1.0, 2.3],
	"u" : [1.1479546337, 1.2921200844, 1.6371973229, 2.6535245176],
	"n" : 6,
	"f" : -7.032997779803717,
	"dt" : "422.958µs"
}
```

Here `p` is the parameter sent by the client, `u` is the solution, `n` is the number of iterations, `f` is the logarithm (base 10) of the fixed-point residual and `dt` is the elapsed time.

**NOTE:** Every time the solver is called, it is warm started with the previous solution.

To **kill** the process gracefully send the message `x`. The server will return to you the message:

```text
[ADIOS!] Received quit command...
```

and will exit immediately.

#### Linux command line


```bash
netcat -u 127.0.0.1 3248
```

## Using the Rust module
The auto-generated Rust module exposes its functionality over a JSON-based communication protocol over a UDP socket. For more information, read the [**UDP communication documentation page**](./udp-sockets).

The auto-generated Rust module can also be used programmatically. (To be updated soon).